Use of guidance

THE APPROVED DOCUMENTS

The Building Regulations 2010 (SI 2010/2214), which came into operation on 1 October 2010, replace the Building Regulations 2000 (SI 2000/2531) and consolidate all subsequent revisions to those regulations. This document is one of a series that has been approved and issued by the Secretary of State for the purpose of providing practical guidance with respect to the requirements of Schedule 1 to and Regulation 7 of the Building Regulations 2010 for England and Wales.

At the back of this document is a list of all the documents that have been approved and issued by the Secretary of State for this purpose.

Approved Documents are intended to provide guidance for some of the more common building situations. However, there may well be alternative ways of achieving compliance with the requirements. Thus there is no obligation to adopt any particular solution contained in an Approved Document if you prefer to meet the relevant requirement in some other way.

Other requirements

The guidance contained in an Approved Document relates only to the particular requirements of the Regulations which the document addresses. The building work will also have to comply with the requirements of any other relevant paragraphs in Schedule 1 to the Regulations.

There are Approved Documents which give guidance on each of the parts of Schedule 1 and on Regulation 7.

D

LIMITATION ON REQUIREMENTS

In accordance with Regulation 8, the requirements in Part D of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations do not require anything to be done except for the purpose of securing reasonable standards of health and safety for persons in or about buildings (and any others who may be affected by buildings or matters connected  with buildings).

MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP

Any building work which is subject to the requirements imposed by Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations shall be carried out in accordance with regulation 7. Guidance on meeting these requirements on materials and workmanship is contained in Approved Document 7.

Building Regulations are made for specific purposes,  primarily the health and safety, welfare and convenience of people and for energy conservation. Standards and other technical specifications may provide relevant guidance to the extent that they relate to these considerations.  However, they may also address other aspects  of performance or matters which, although they relate to health and safety etc., are not covered by the Building Regulations.

When an Approved Document makes reference to a named standard, the relevant version of the standard to which it refers is the one listed at the end of the publication. However, if this version has been revised or updated by the issuing standards body, the new version may be used  as a source of guidance provided it continues  to address the relevant requirements of the Regulations.

Approved Document D Cavity insulation

1

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION D USE OF GUIDANCE

THE WORKPLACE (HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE) REGULATIONS 1992

The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992 contain some requirements which affect building design. The main requirements are now covered by the Building Regulations, but for further information see: Workplace health, safety and welfare. Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992. Approved code of practice and guidance, 1998. HSE, L 24. ISBN 0 71760 413 6.

The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992 apply to the common parts of flats and similar buildings if people such as cleaners and caretakers are employed to work in these common parts. Where the requirements of the Building Regulations that are covered by this part do not apply to dwellings, the provisions may still be required in the situations described above in order to satisfy the Workplace Regulations.

Cavity insulation 2

Approved Document D

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONCAVITY INSULATION The Requirement

This Approved Document deals with the following Requirement from Part D of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010.

D1

Requirement Cavity insulation

D1.  If insulating material is inserted into a cavity in a cavity wall,  reasonable  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  the subsequent permeation of any toxic fumes from that material into any part of the building occupied by people.

Limits on application

Approved Document D Cavity insulation

3

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIOND1 Acceptable level of performance

To reduce the risks to the health of persons in buildings formaldehyde fumes given off by urea formaldehyde foams should not penetrate to the occupied parts of buildings to an extent which would give rise to an irritant concentration.

Cavity insulation 4

Approved Document D

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONProvisions meeting the performance

D1

Urea formaldehyde (UF) foam

1.1 Insulating materials which give off formaldehyde fumes (either when used or later in normal use) may be used to insulate the cavity in a cavity wall where there is a continuous barrier which will minimise as far as practicable the passage of fumes to the occupiable parts.

Technical solution

A cavity wall may be insulated with UF 1.2 foam where:

a.  the inner leaf of the wall is built of masonry (bricks or blocks); and b.  the suitability of the wall for foam filling is assessed before the work is carried out in accordance with BS 8208-1:1985 Guide to assessment of suitability of external cavity walls for filling with thermal insulants. Existing traditional cavity construction; and

c.  the person carrying out the work holds (or operates under) a current Certificate of Registration of Assessed Capability for the work he is doing; and d.  the material is in accordance with the relevant recommendations of BS 5617:1985 Specifications for urea formaldehyde (UF) foam systems suitable for thermal insulation of cavity walls with masonry or concrete inner and outer leaves; and e.  the installation is in accordance with BS 5618:1985 Code of practice for thermal insulation of cavity walls (with masonry or concrete inner and outer leaves) by filling with urea formaldehyde (UF) foam systems.

Approved Document D Cavity insulation

5

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION D Standards referred to

D1

BS 5617:1985 Specification for urea formaldehyde (UF) foam systems suitable for thermal insulation of cavity walls with masonry or concrete inner and outer leaves.

BS 5618:1985 Code of practice for thermal insulation of cavity walls (with masonry or concrete inner and outer leaves) by filling with urea formaldehyde (UF) foam systems. AMD 6262 1990, AMD 7114 1992.

BS 8208-1:1985 Guide to assessment of suitability of external cavity walls for filling with thermal insulants. Existing traditional cavity construction.  AMD 4996 1985.

Cavity insulation 6

Approved Document D

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION

